---
title: Digital Signals
layout: default
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---
Here we look at the digital input and output from the device.
The typical hardware devices that handle the physical aspects of digital signals are LEDs and Switches.
<!--more-->

{::options parse_block_html="true" /}

<section class="exercise">
### 1 LED output
Clone the repository [s1.1](https://github.com/kf5011/s1.1)
this contains a basic blinky program.

Build the program and upload it into the FRDM-K64F.  Once done you will need to press the reset button.

**resources**
  1. Refer to the LED diagram in the [FRDM K64F Userguide]({{site.baseurl}}{% link docs/FRDMK64FUG.pdf %}#page=14) section 10, page 14 for pin connections.
  2. Summary of important [pin names](https://os.mbed.com/teams/Freescale/wiki/frdm-k64f-pinnames)
  3. An [overview](https://os.mbed.com/platforms/FRDM-K64F/) of the board and the mbed library
{: .note}

The start point is ([s1.1](https://github.com/kf5011/s1.1)):
```c
#include <mbed.h>

int main() {

    DigitalOut red(PTB22);

    while(1) {
      red.write(0);
      wait(0.5);
      red.write(1);
      wait(0.5);
    }
}
```
{: .code }

 1. Using the [FRDM K64F Userguide]({{site.baseurl}}{% link docs/FRDMK64FUG.pdf%}#page=14) and/or the [FRDM K64F Schematic]({{site.baseurl}}{% link docs/FRDM-K64F_SCH.pdf%}), identify the pins that drive the Green and Blue LEDs on the board.
 1. Modify the program to manage the Green and Blue LEDs in addition to the Red LED.
 1. Modify the flashing pattern to make use of all three LEDs.
{: .question}

1. What value needs to be written to the pin in order to
 * turn the LED on?
 * turn the LED off?
2. From the Schematic can you identify why the values are what they are?  
<span class="hint">What is pin-2 of the LED package connected to?</span>
{: .question }

1.  Write a wrapper that provides functions for `on()`, `off()`, and/or `set()` that takes into account the way the LEDs are wired.
{: .question}

</section>

<section class="exercise">
### 2 Push Button input
Clone the repository [s1.2](https://github.com/kf5011/s1.2).

This is the base level LED driver from [s1.1](https://github.com/kf5011/s1.1) with the addition of a single push button (One of the two on the base board.)

```c
#include <mbed.h>

#include <stdbool.h>

int main() {
    bool flashing = false;

    DigitalOut red(PTB22);
    DigitalIn  btn(PTC6);

    while(1) {
        if( btn.read() ) flashing = true;
            else         flashing = false;

        if(flashing){
            red.write(0);
            wait(0.5);
            red.write(1);
            wait(0.5);
        }else{
            red.write(1);
        }
    }
}
```
{: .code}

1. Locate the buttons (switches SW2 and SW3) on the [FRDM K64F Schematic]({{site.baseurl}}{% link docs/FRDM-K64F_SCH.pdf%}#page=4).
2. Using the schematic and observing the behaviour of the program what can be deduced about:
    * What value is read when the button is
        + pressed?
        + _not_ pressed?
    * Why is this the case?
1. Add a wrapper function that evaluates as
  `bool ispressed( /*button*/ )`{: .code}
  that returns the correct state of the button.
{: .question }
</section>

<section class="exercise">
### 3 Application Shield IO
The Application Shield has a second RGB-LED and a 5-way joystick like switch.

1. Refering to the Application Shield [Schematic]({{site.baseurl}}{% link docs/ApplicationShield V_1_0_0 SCH.pdf%}),
  * Identify the pins that drive the shield RGB-LED
1. Extend the capabilities of the LED wrapper functions to include the Shield's LEDs.
{: .question}

1. Find the 5-way switch on the schematic
  * Is it wired the same way with respect to the _ground_ and _3.3V_ signals?
  * What will the impact be on the implementation of the `ispressed()` function?
1. extend the capability of the `ispressed()` function to include the application shield.
  {: .question}

</section>

<section class="exercise">
### 4 exercises
* Flash an LED at given rate
    1. 1Hz
    1. 10Hz
    1. 45 flashes per minute
{: .question}

* Traffic light sequence:  Using Blue instead of Amber:
  * create a sequence of led on and offs that replicate a traffic light sequence.  What timings do you use for each phase?
  * using the RGB LED on the base and the shield create a junction with two traffic lights:
    + what are the allowed combinations of lights?
    + how would you ensure correct operation?
{: .question}


* Maritime navigation lights have characteristic sequences of flashes,
  (see [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Light_characteristic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Light_characteristic)),
  How would you create the following patterns
  + a flashing light has rate of 37.5 flashes per minute, the light is off for three times longer than it is on
  + A light flashes (as above) showing 3 flashes, every 6 seconds.
{: .question}

* safety switch (two hand start) is a common feature of machinery.  To start flashing both switches (buttons) must be pressed together.
{: .question}

* flash at variable rates:  a countdown timer on a camera flashes initially at 1 flash per second, it flashes faster over 10 seconds, showing a continuous light just before the camera and flash fires.
{: .question}
</section>

<section class="exercise">
### extension
explore plain C bare-metal code.
1. gate clock signals
2. configure pin
3. set gpio state
4. set,clear,toggle
</section>
