---
title: Events and interrupts
layout: default
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---
Handling events, button interrupts and timer interrupts.
We want to be able to respond to external events, as they occur.
Or to create a precisely timed series of events.
<!--more-->

{::options parse_block_html="true" /}

<section class="note">
[Signal Edge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Signal_edge)
<dl>
 <dt>
 rising edge
 </dt>
 <dd>
 when the pin chages from a 0 to a 1
 </dd>
 <dt>
 faling egde
 </dt>
 <dd>
 when the pin chages from a 1 to a 0
 </dd>
</dl>
</section>

<section class="exercise">
### 1. Button edge Events
The repository [s2.1](https://github.com/kf5011/s2.1) uses a falling and rising edge interrupt on each of the two buttons on the base board.

1. Run the program and examine it's behaviour.  (You'll need the serial-monitor to see the output from the print statements)
2. Pay close attention to when the actions occur, when the button is pressed or released.

<section class="question">
1. Identify the input pins related to the buttons and the 5-way joystick on the shield.
2. Each pin can have an interrupt for the rising-edge and falling-edge signal, a total of 14 possible interrupts.
3. Investigate the actions of the interrupts for the base-board switches and the 5-way switch.  What differences can you see?
</section>
</section>

<section class="exercise">
### 2. Timer interrupts
The FRDM-K64F had a Periodic Interrupt Timer (PIT).  This can generate an interrupt at a given rate.  There are 4 individual timers, which can be used in isolation or chained together to give a more flexible (and longer period) interrupt pattern.

The Mbed library uses this to drive a [soft-timer](https://os.mbed.com/docs/latest/reference/ticker.html).  This allows an arbitrary number of functions to be called at given periods, rather that depend on hardware limits.

Clone [s2.2](https://github.com/kf5011/s2.2)

Modify the program to use a callback every 1ms (1000µs).
Use the callback function (`flash()`) to count in ms, and flash an led with the following pattern:

  1. On for 0.1s
  1. Off for 0.1s
  1. On for 0.3s
  1. Off for 0.7s

  <section class="question">
  Try some of the flashing patterns from [seminar 01]({{site.baseurl}}{% link _seminars/01.md %}#exercises)
  </section>
</section>

<section class="exercise">
### 3. Morse Code  – – ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ – ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅
[Morse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morse_code) is sent as a series of flashes, _dots_ and _dashes_.  There is a [convention for the timing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morse_code#Representation.2C_timing.2C_and_speeds) as follows:

>  The dot duration is the basic unit of time measurement in code transmission.  
> The duration of a dash is three times the duration of a dot.  
> Each dot or dash is followed by a short silence, equal to the dot duration.  
> The letters of a word are separated by a space equal to three dots (one dash),  
> and the words are separated by a space equal to seven dots.

1. Write a program to flash an led in dots and dashes.  
   Use the timer period to control the speed of a dot-time-unit.
2. Devise an encoding for dots and dashes.  
    (_a suggestion_: use `0` for off `1` for on, a dash is `111` )
3. Use the callback function to _walk_ along a string of `0`s and `1`s  turning the LED on or off as required.

<section class="question">
* How would you convert a string containing a message into a string containing dots, dashes, and spaces, and into `0`s and `1`s?  
* How would you convert it directly into `0`s and `1`s?

* If you stored the `0`s and `1`s as bits, how would you store a message in memory?  
How would you _walk_ along the sequence of bits?
How do you know when the message ends?
</section>
