---
title:  Timing and Events
layout: default
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---
Managing timings, threads, and events.
<!--more-->
1. toc
{:toc}
{::options parse_block_html="true" /}

# Basic threads
<section class="exercise">
## Blink
The Mbed libraries provide a simple thread that can be used to manage timings.
[s6.1](https://github.com/kf5011/s6.1)

```c
    worker.start( flash_red );
```
{: .example}
The thread is started by passing it the function to call.

Note: the thread function has it's own `while(1)` block, so that it keeps running.
{: .note}

1. Add other  threads that flashe other LEDs
2. How easy is it to determine timings?
{: .question}
</section>


# Event Queues
<section class="exercise">
## Periodic and delayed tasks.
What happens if we want a task to run at a specific period?  Or to act after a given delay?  The Mbed libraries provide an `EventQueue` which has mechanisms for triggering events.
[s6.2](https://github.com/kf5011/s6.2)

The `EventQueue` has a `call_every` function that allows a function to be called at a given periodic rate.

```c
queue.call_every(300, blink);
```
{: .example}

<section class="note">
1. Nothing happens until the queue is told to dispatch events `queue.dispatch_forever()`
2. The function called for the event exits like any other function.  **It does not need a `while(1)` loop**
</section>

There is also a `call_after()` function to delay the action for a given time.

1. Add other periodic functions (led flashes) to the program.
2. Does the call to `dispatch_forever` return?
{: .question}

</section>

<section class="exercise">
## Worker Thread for the event Queue
What happens after `dispatch_forever` is called?  it may be useful to create a thread specifically to handle the `EventQueue`

```c
Thread worker;
worker.start(callback(&queue, &EventQueue::dispatch_forever ));
```
{: .example}

Note: the use of a function to create the `callback`.  This is a means of robustly preserving state in real time systems (see [Callbacks](https://os.mbed.com/docs/v5.6/reference/platform.html#callbacks) section of the [Platform Overview](https://os.mbed.com/docs/v5.6/reference/platform.html) first for deeper insight into their use.)
</section>

# Event Queues for Interrupts
Remember that for Interrupt Service Routines, we can't use lengthy or costly operations?  We can use an event queue.  The ISR generates an event, which is then handled separately outside of the ISR.

<section class="exercise">
Example [s6.3](https://github.com/kf5011/s6.3) shows how we can register an event trigger with an Interrupt:

```c
sw.fall(queue.event(blink));
```
{: .example}

Causes the event that calls `blink` to be generated on the falling edge interrupt of switch 2.

Note: we still have to have a thread running for the event queue.
{: .note}
</section>

# Modular programming
Threads and events allow a more modular approach to programming.

<section class="exercise">
1. Create a thread that simply updates the display (LCD) periodically.
2. Create a couple of functions that increment and decrement a counter (shown on the display)
3. Create a Thread for an Event queue.
   1. Generate an event from Sw2 to call the increment function
   1. Generate an event from Sw3 to call the decrement function
4. Poll one of the sensors (Accelerometer, Potentiometer, Temperature) regularly (using `call_every`) and update a variable shown on the display.
</section>
